once upon a time there was a place
called lester land
now lester land looks a lot like the
united states
like the united states it has about 311
million people and of that 311 million
people
it turns out 144 000 are
called lester if matt's in the audience
i just borrowed that i'll i'll return it
in a second this this character from
your
from your series so 144 000 are called
lester which means about .05 percent
is named lester now lester's and lester
land
have this extraordinary power there are
two elections every election cycle in
leicester land one is called the general
election
the other is called the lester election
and in the general election it's the
citizens who get to vote but in the
leicester election it's the lesters who
get to vote and here's the trick
in order to run in the general election
you must do extremely well in the
leicester election you don't necessarily
have to win but you must do
extremely well now what can we say about
democracy in leicesterland
what we can say number one is the
supreme court said in citizens united
the people have the ultimate influence
over elected officials
because after all there is a general
election
but only after the lesters have had
their way with the candidates who wish
to run
in the general election and number two
obviously this dependence upon the
lesters
is going to produce a subtle understated
we could say camouflaged bending
to keep the lesters happy
okay so we have a democracy no doubt
but it's dependent upon the lesters and
dependent upon the people
it has a competing dependencies we could
say
conflicting dependencies depending upon
who
the lesters are okay that's lester land
now there are three things i want you to
see now that i've described leicester
land number one
the united states is lester land the
united states is leicester
the united states also looks like this
also has two elections one we call
the general election the second we
should call
the money election in the general
election it's the citizens who get to
vote if you're over 18 in some states if
you have an id
in the money election it's the funders
who get to vote
the funders who get to vote and just
like in leicester land the trick is to
run in the general election you must do
extremely well
in the money election you don't
necessarily have to win there is jerry
brown but you must do
extremely well and here's the key there
are just
as few relevant funders in usa land
as there are lesters in leicesterland
now you say really really .05
well here the numbers from 2010. .26
percent of america
gave 200 or more to any federal
candidate point zero five percent
gave the maximum amount to any federal
candidate point zero one percent
the one percent of the one percent gave
10 000
or more to federal candidates and in
this election cycle
my favorite statistic is point zero zero
zero zero
four two percent for those of you doing
the numbers you know that's 132
americans gave
60 of the super pac money spent
in the cycle we have just seen ending so
i'm just a lawyer i look at this range
of numbers and i say it's fair for me to
say it's point zero five percent who are
a relevant funders in america
in this sense the funders are our
lesters
now what can we say about this democracy
in usa land well as the supreme court
said in citizens united we could say of
course the people have the ultimate
influence
over the elected officials we have a
general election
but only after the funders have had
their way
with the candidates who wish to run in
that general election
and number two obviously this dependence
upon the funders
produces a subtle understated
camouflaged bending
to keep the funders happy candidates for
congress
and members of congress spend between 30
and 70 percent of their time raising
money to get back to congress or to get
their party back into power
and the question we need to ask is what
does it do to them these humans as they
spend their time behind the telephone
calling people they've never met but
calling the tiniest slice
of the one percent as anyone would as
they do this they develop a sixth
sense a constant awareness about how
what they do might affect their ability
to raise money they become in the words
of the x-files
shape-shifters as they constantly adjust
their views in light of what they know
will help them to raise money not on
issues one to ten
but in issues eleven to one thousand
leslie byrne a democrat for virginia
describes that when she went to congress
she was told by a colleague quote
always lean to the green then to clarify
she went on
he was not an environmentalist
so here too we have a democracy a
democracy depended upon the funders and
depended upon the people
competing dependencies possibly
conflicting dependencies depending upon
who the funders are okay the united
states is leicesterland point number one
here's point number two
the united states is worse than lester
land worse than leicester land because
you can imagine in leicesterland if we
lester's got a letter from the
government that said
hey you get to pick who gets to run in
the general election
we would think maybe of a kind of
aristocracy of lesters you know there
are lesters from every part of social
society there are rich lesters poor
lesters black lusters white less
not many women lesters but put that to a
sign one second we have celestials from
everywhere we could think what could we
do
to make leicesterland better it's at
least possible
the lesters would act for the good of
leicester land
but in our land in this land in usa land
there are certainly some sweet lester's
out there many of them in this room here
today
but the vast majority of the leicester's
act
for the leicesters because the shifting
coalitions that are comprising the 0.05
percent are not comprising it for the
public interest it's for
their private interest in this sense the
usa is worse than leicester land and
finally point number three
whatever one wants to say about
leicester land against the background of
its history its traditions in our land
in usa land
lester land is a corruption a corruption
now by corruption i don't mean brown
paper bag
cash secreted among members of congress
i don't mean rob lagoyevich sense of
corruption
i don't mean any criminal act the
corruption i'm talking about is
perfectly legal
it's a corruption relative to the
framers baseline
for this republic the frameworks gave us
what they called
a republic but by a republic they meant
a representative democracy
and by a representative democracy they
meant a government as madison put it in
federalist 52 that would have a branch
that would be dependent
upon the people alone
so here's the model of government they
have the people and the government
with this exclusive dependency but the
problem here
is that congress has evolved a different
dependence no longer a dependence upon
the people
alone increasingly it depends upon the
funders now
this is a dependence too but it's
different and conflicting from a
dependence upon the people alone so long
as the funders are not the people
this is a corruption now there's good
news and bad news about this corruption
one bit of good news is it's bipartisan
equal opportunity corruption
it blocks the left on a whole range of
issues that we on the left really care
about
it blocks the right too as it makes
principled arguments of the right
increasingly impossible so the wright
wants smaller government
when al gore was vice president his team
has had an idea for deregulating a
significant portion of the
telecommunications industry
the chief policy man took this idea to
capitol hill and as he reported
back to me the response was hell no if
we deregulate these guys
how are we going to raise money from
them
this is a system that's designed to save
the status quo
including the status quo of big and
invasive government it works against the
left
and the right and that you might say is
good news but here's the bad news
it's a pathological democracy destroying
corruption
because in any system where the members
are dependent upon the tiniest fraction
of us
for their election that means the
tiniest number of us
the tiniest tiniest number of us can
block
reform i know that should have been like
a like a rock or something i could only
find cheese i'm sorry so there it is
block reform because there is an economy
here
an economy of influence an economy with
lobbyists at the center
which feeds on polarization it feeds on
dysfunction the worst that it is for
us the better that it is for this
fundraising
henry david thoreau there are a thousand
hacking at the branches of evil to one
who is striking
at the root this is
the root okay now
every single one of you know this
you couldn't be here if you didn't know
this yet you ignore it
you ignore it this is an impossible
problem
you focus on the possible problems like
eradicating polio
from the world or taking an image of
every single street across the globe
or building the first real universal
translator or building a fusion
factory in your garage these are the
manageable problems so you ignore
so you ignore this corruption but we
cannot
ignore this corruption anymore
we need a government that works
and not works for the left or the right
but works for the left and the right the
citizens of the left
and right because there is no sensible
reform
possible until we end this corruption so
i want you to take hold to grab the
issue you care the most about
climate change is mine but it might be
financial reform or a simpler tax system
or inequality grab that issue
sit it down in front of you look
straight in its eyes and tell it
there is no christmas this year there
will never be a christmas we will never
get your issue solved until we
fix this issue first so it's not that
mine is the most important issue
it's not yours is the most important
issue
but mine is the first issue the issue we
have to solve before we get to fix the
issues
you care about no sensible reform and we
cannot afford a world a future with no
sensible reform
okay so how do we do it turns out the
analytics here are
easy simple if the problem is
members spending an extraordinary amount
of time fundraising from the tiniest
slice of america
the solution is to have them spend less
time fundraising but fundraise from a
wider
slice of america to spread it out to
spread the funder influence
so that we restore the idea of
dependence upon the people alone
and to do this does not require a
constitutional amendment
changing the first amendment to do this
would require a single
statute a statute establishing what we
think of as small dollar funded
elections a statute of citizen-funded
campaigns and there are any number of
these proposals out there fair elections
now act
the american anti-corruption act an idea
in my book that i call the grant and
franklin project to give vouchers to
people to fund elections
an idea of john sarbanes called the
grassroots democracy act
each of these would fix this corruption
by spreading out the influence of
funders
to all of us the analytics are easy here
it's the politics that's hard
indeed impossibly hard because this
reform would shrink
k street shrink k street
and capitol hill congressman
jim cooper a democrat from tennessee put
it
has become a farm league for k street
a farm league for k street members and
staffers and bureaucrats have an
increasingly common business model in
their head
business model focused on their life
after government
their life as lobbyists 50 percent of
the senate between 1998 and 2004 left to
become lobbyists 42 percent of the house
those numbers have only gone up
and as united republic calculated last
april the average
increase in salary for those who they
tracked was 1452
so it's fair to ask how is it possible
for them to change this
now i get this skepticism
i get this cynicism i get this sense of
impossibility but i don't buy it this is
a
solvable issue if you think about the
issues
our parents tried to solve in the 20th
century
issues like racism or sexism or the
issue that we've been fighting in this
century
homophobia those are hard issues
you don't wake up one day no longer a
racist it takes
generations to tear that intuition that
dna out of the soul of a people
but this is a problem of just incentives
just incentives change the incentives
and the behavior changes and the states
that have adopted
small dollar funded systems have seen
overnight
a change in the practice when
connecticut adopted this system in the
very first year
78 of the elected representatives gave
up
large contributions and took small
contributions only
it's solvable not by
being a democrat not by being a
republican
it's solvable by being citizens by being
citizens
by being citizens because
if you want to kick start reform
look i could kick start reform
at half the price of fixing energy
policy
i could give you back a republic okay
but
even if you're not yet with me even if
you believe this is impossible
what the five years since i spoke at ted
has taught me as i've spoken about this
issue again and again
is even if you think it's impossible
that is irrelevant
irrelevant i spoke at dartmouth once and
a woman stood up
after i spoke right in my book and she
said to me
professor you've convinced me this is
hopeless
hopeless there's nothing we can do
when she said that i scrambled i tried
to think how do i respond to that
hopelessness what is that sense of
hopelessness and what hit me was an
image of my
six-year-old son and i imagined a doctor
coming to me and saying
your son your son has terminal brain
cancer and there's nothing you can do
nothing you can do so
would i do nothing you just sit there
accept that okay nothing i can do i'm
going off to build google glass
of course not i would do everything i
could and i would do everything i could
because this
is what love means that the odds are
irrelevant and that you do whatever the
hell you can the odds be damned and then
i saw the obvious link because even
we liberals love this country
and so when the pundits and the
politicians say that change is
impossible
what this love of country says back is
that's
just irrelevant we lose
something dear something everyone in
this room loves and cherishes
if we lose this republican so we act
with everything we can to prove these
pundits wrong so here's my question
do you have that love
do you have that love because if you do
then what the hell are you what the hell
are we
doing when ben franklin was carried from
the
constitutional convention in september
of 1787 he was stopped in the street by
a woman who said mr franklin
what have you wrought franklin said
a republic madam if you can keep it
a republic a representative democracy
a government dependent upon the people
alone
we have lost that republic
all of us have to act to get it back
thank you very much
thank you
you